In this video we'll learn about friends of a class in C++.
Friends have always been a controversial topic in C++.
The controversy is about encapsulation and whether friends violating cancellation or enhance it.
You can decide where you are on this issue but friends are indeed part of the C++ language and it's
important to understand them.
So what does a friend of a Class A friend of a class is a function or another class that has access
to private class members and that other function or class is not a member of the class that it's accessing
In the case of friend functions.
These can be standalone functions or member methods of another class and in the case of another class
the entire class will have access to the private information of the class granting friendship.
So as you can see friends have unfettered access to both public and private data members of a class
but they're not members of the class.
It's important to understand how C++ treats friendship in the big picture.
First friendship must be granted not taken a class must explicitly declare its friends in its class
declaration using the friend keyword.
Friendship is NOT symmetric so if a is a friend of B that doesn't mean that B is a friend Devey.
This must be explicitly granted.
Friendship is not transitive.
If A is A friend of B and B is a friend of C then A is not a friend of C again unless specifically granted.
And finally friendship is not inherited So what does declaring a friend look like in C++.
Here you can see the case of declaring a standalone nonmember function as a friend of the player class.
Notice that the player class grants the friendship by declaring the function prototype preceded by the
friend keyword.
That's it.
Now the display player function has access to everything in the player class.
So in the display player function we don't have to go through public getters or setters to display the
player information or set player information we can directly access to a private class attribute.
In fact we can change them as well if we wanted to.
Since the object is passed by reference in this case non-contest Let's see how we would declare a method
in another class.
As a friend in this case we're declaring the display player method of the other class as a friend.
That method will now have access to everything in the player class and that method might be implemented
as follows.
Notice that it is indeed a member of the other class but you can use the player class as private attributes
directly within it.
Finally we can declare an entire separate class as a friend in this case.
We declared the class other class as a friend of player.
So all the methods in the other class will have access to the player class as private attributes.
As you can see.
Friendship is very powerful.
It can bypass function call overhead associated with getters and setters and other class methods and
allow direct access to private attributes.
Sometimes we have classes that use other classes and writing code using getters and setters becomes
long tedious and sometimes gives you overhead.
However that shouldn't be the only reason for granting friendship friendship should be granted only
when it makes sense in the design of your system and then only the minimal necessary friendship should
be granted.
We'll see friend functions again when we use operator overloading in the next section.